this talk is called how big is the
universe and attempts to answer one
apparently very simple question and it
will take just over an hour I think to
go through this and try and come to some
sort of conclusions about it because as
with all questions it turns out to be
more complicated than it first appears
so the first ideas about the universe
really were the idea of all of the
planets orbiting around with the earth
in the center the geocentric model and
the planets including the moon and the
Sun as planets anything that moved was a
planet and the awol orbited round and
then you had the fixed stars in a sphere
around the earth surrounding it that
carried them around their journey around
the earth every 24 hours or so and this
is all well and good as a theory of the
universe but of course it begs a very
interesting question and that's
illustrated by this picture here showing
actually a Flat Earth but nevertheless
with a hemisphere of stars above it and
all of the planets and the Sun inside of
that zone of course we know that the
earth is not flat and it is indeed
talking about the the earth and the
orbits but the shepherd here is asking
the question what's outside the edge of
the crystal spheres that carry the as
fixed stars and he's poked his head
through and can see all of the cogwheels
up at the top left there and the inner
workings of the machinery that was
assumed to perhaps drive everything
around in the circles around the earth
now what's behind that question is
really
another version of the same question how
big is the universe and the shepherd
here is worried about whether or not
there is an edge in other words asking
the question is the universe infinite
and this a very important question and
one that we still do not have a perfect
answer to but I'll try to convince you
of what I think the answer is during the
course of this talk the first essence
who really have a go at this was older
and he made perhaps the simplest
observation of all time in astronomy
which is that it's dark we see lots of
stars now this may not sound
particularly profound but what he noted
was there were not an infinite number of
stars there was a finite number of them
with gaps between and thinking about
this old a reasoned that if you had an
eternal and infinite universe containing
an infinite number of stars dotted
around roughly equally all over it then
eventually all lines of sight from your
eyeball no matter which direction you
looked out into the universe that line
of sight would eventually land on the
surface of one of the infinitely many
stars might have to go a very long way
but ultimately there would always be at
least one star on any line of sight if
there were an infinite number of them
and if that were true then all the lines
of sight would gradually fill in to
appear as bright as the surface of a
star does rather I was illustrated in
this animation here as all of these
stars are gradually taking account of
the more and more distant ones fill in
all of the gaps to the point where there
are no black areas left and so the sky
would not be dark at night it would be
fully bright in fact we would be toasted
by the combined heat and light radiation
from the whole sky looking as bright as
the surface of the Sun does because all
lines of sight would be equally coming
from the surface of a star and that's
quite a profound observation and it says
that one of those things at the top
there must be wrong it's either not
eternal not infinite or doesn't contain
an infinite number of stars or two out
of three or all three of those could be
true but at least one of them must be
true
now some is the objection saying our but
sometimes the line of sight in
particular directions is blocked and in
particular we see these dark nebulae
like a horse head nebula on the left
they're blocking out the light from
stars that are behind it and so there
would be Lions of sights that correspond
to no stars being visible and then on
same on the right here we've got
Barnard's nebula which is a dark dusty
molecular cloud of gas and you can see
one or two bright stars peeping out of
it but in general it's blocked the line
of sight from the stars of the Milky Way
behind it that's fairly clear now we
know this cannot be right because
gradually the Starlight that is being
blocked must be being absorbed by the
blocking object and if that were going
on for long enough then it would heat
the object up to a really quite warm
temperature and we can measure the
temperature of these clouds using our
infrared telescopes and indeed show that
they are very cold indeed and so they're
not the solely responsible for blocking
all of the infinite amount of starlight
that would be coming from behind them in
Olbers ideas and so that meant Kepler
got in on the act and had to think about
this question as well and he said as
perhaps it's infinitely large and
infinitely old but only contains a
finite number of stars in other words
implying that stars thin out or stop at
some point as you go further away and
that would be a sufficient explanation
to explain Olbers paradox that
eventually your line of sight would go
beyond the point where there were no
more stars without having hit anything
you do need an infinite number of stars
to fill in every possible line of sight
after all
but it's not really we see this picture
on the right here is taken by Hubble and
there's a couple of bright stars that
are shown by the diffraction spikes and
I know David's on the line and doesn't
like diffraction spikes but the rest of
the objects are galaxies and there are
thousands and thousands of them in the
photograph we'll talk more about that in
a minute but really to get a grip on
this question we need to actually start
measuring distances the question then is
well how do we know how far away the
stars are we can't exactly unfurl a
cosmic tape measure and go and measure
the distance we need a very long tape
measure and a rocket that could take us
there and bring us back with the answer
and we just don't have that so let's
start a little bit less ambitiously
rather than measuring the distance to
the stars let's just measure the
distance to the Sun what turns out
that's quite difficult but it was done
by Aristarchus of Samos very clever
method that he came up with and he
realized that if you looked at the moon
when it was in exactly half phase then
the triangle made by the moon's Sun and
the earth must have a right angle at the
point where the moon is and so from his
knowledge of trigonometry he could
measure the angle between the direction
of line-of-sight to the center of the
moon and to the Sun and if he could do
that accurately in our fake would solve
the shape of the triangle and he
measured it and he reckoned it was 87
degrees that angle meaning that the
angle at the Sun was the other three
degrees and calculated therefore that
the distance between the Earth and the
Sun must be something like eighteen to
twenty times further than the distance
from the earth to the moon
well that doesn't quite solve your
problem but you can use other events you
can use a solar eclipse are shown on the
right where the moon goes directly in
front of the Sun and yet that tells you
that the ratio of their sizes is
proportional to the ratio of the
distance it turns out by cosmic
coincidence that the moon is 400 times
smaller than the Sun and four hundred
times nearer and so it perfectly blocks
out the Sun in the sky and of course we
can measure what angle that is and it's
half a degree across they the disk of
either the Sun or the moon but you could
also get a handle on this using the
other type of Eclipse Illustrated in the
bottom diagram where the earth goes
between the moon and the Sun and the
earth shadow covers the moon by
measuring the parameters of that you can
actually get enough information to solve
the equations and work out estimates of
the actual distances and Aristarchus did
all of that
he wasn't absolutely right there are one
or two things that tripped him up the
measurement of 87 degrees is not quite
right because the sun's rays coming in
at a low angle through the atmosphere
get refracted and he didn't know about
that and so that would have changed his
answer from 87 degrees to 89 and a half
and obviously make quite a big
difference but about a thousand years
later people were still trying to
actually get a grip on the size of the
solar system and they realized there was
a method involving the planet Venus that
could be used to observe Venus crossing
in front of the Sun and there's a little
picture that I took in 2004 when Venus
passed in front of the Sun a little
black dot there blotting out some of the
sun's light but if you observe that from
different locations on the earth a known
distance apart then as shown in the
bottom diagram the
dot of Venus moves across different
chords of the disk of the Sun and they
take different lengths of time as a
result for the transit so it depends
where you are and that allows you to use
trigonometry to solve the size of the
Earth's orbit and indeed then the orbits
of the other planets as well come from
that and so that was a very popular
sport when the transit of Venus was
happening in the nineteenth century okay
so if we now return to the distance of
two things outside the solar system we
can start to use trigonometry on them as
well if we can make very precise
measurements and the way we do it is we
use the baseline now of the whole of the
Earth's orbit so taking measurements at
two points six months apart on the
Earth's orbit we get a baseline of a
triangle so that is 300 million
kilometers across two astronomical units
and if we note that a nearby star to the
Sun changes its position and compared to
the stars that are very very far away
and therefore don't appear to move then
we can get an estimate of the distance
based on the trigonometry as is called
the parallax method you can do it
yourself if you I usually get people to
put their thumb up and stick their thumb
out in front of their face and line it
up having shut one eye with a distant
object and then switch eyes and the
distance between your eyes causes the
nearby object to shift its position
compared to the distant background as
shown in this diagram and it's in that
map method that the human brain computes
the distance to objects and allows you
to do things like catch a tennis ball
that's been thrown towards you because
you can see that the change in the
parallax as it's moving and work out the
speed
distance of the object and so for that
we can do that only really do it for the
nearby stars where there is enough of a
shift in the position and initially from
the ground the limitation was the
precision with which we could make those
observations and that's about half an
arc second because that's limited by the
atmospheric turbulence in the Earth's
atmosphere that causes stars to twinkle
and so forth causes about half an arc
second of movement just because of the
turbulence and blurring out effect on
the stars themselves so we can't be any
more sure than that as to hell that what
their position actually is and to get
around that you have to go to space and
one mission that did that very
successfully was the Hipparchus
satellite and that measured angles to
one one thousandth of an arc second so
five hundred times improvement and was
there brought for accurate out to about
five hundred light years able to give us
really quite a good map of the local
part of our universe of our Milky Way
with several hundred stars within that
distance little diagram there of a few
of the local ones you got the Sun in the
center and if you look there you can
probably recognize some of the names
like Arcturus Sirius they're really
quite close to the Sun that's why
they're so bright and as you go further
away now they we've got at the top there
caster old Oberon and capela showing up
and those are further away but a bit
brighter because they're actually all
giant stars these days giving off a lot
more light now the next step really is
to try and extrapolate from the known
stars that we've measured using a mesh
third called standard candles the
illustration here is a series of candles
of equal power output but at different
distances and the further away ones look
fainter in proportion to the distance
that they are from the observer in fact
right into the square of the distance
it's another of these inverse square
laws and so if you have a object twice
as far away it will appear a quarter as
bright if the power output is the same
if it is a standard candle and that
turns out to be quite a useful method so
if we can look at stars and say well
that star looks in all respects very
similar in its color and its spectrum of
its light to another star where we do
know the distance we can perhaps make an
estimate of its distance just based on
the relative brightness of the two so
now the story turns really to a couple
of other very famous individuals
Immanuel Kant the philosopher in 1755
proposed that the stars that we saw were
part of the Milky Way and that this was
a huge collection of stars whirling
around held together by their mutual
gravity and as shown in the picture
that's a picture of the Andromeda galaxy
not of our own we can't take a picture
of our own because we are inside it it's
like trying to take a picture of your
house and it's garden by standing in the
bathroom we really got a very poor view
of our own galaxy from where we are so
actually that's a very very good
inference and of course he knew about
Newton's laws of gravity from you know
fifty years earlier and all of that so
he used that and just the power of his
mind to really explain what was going on
in terms of the stars in the Milky Way
that we saw in the sky
thirty years later William Herschel had
a go and actually did the first map of
the Milky Way galaxy and this is it this
strange thing that looks like a sea
monster here with all the dots and the
tentacles is Herschel's map and the
bright object right in the center let me
a my mouse pointer here is asked with
the Sun position there and what he did
was he measured the brightness of many
many stars that he could see in the sky
and their direction he flattened their
direction to a two-dimensional direction
not worrying about the up-and-down but
just the direction in the plane of the
Milky Way and plotted them on a clock
face relative to the Sun with the
distance out from the Sun representing
how bright they were or in fact how
faint they are so he had the brightest
ones plotted near the Sun and the dimmer
ones further away in proportion to their
dimness now the reason he did that was
he said well I don't know that they're
all standard candles that and that
they're all equal in power output but
I'm going to have to make that
assumption because it's probably more
true than not on the average and it
might tell me something even if the
detail is not entirely right because
some of the stars are more powerful than
others
now the photograph up at the top there
is one of the Milky Way and I've
oriented them the same way from the top
left to the bottom right as Herschel's
seamonster diagram because you can see
here these both eaten here with an octa
strain between the window no is
obscuring more distance to us in red
where we have here same sort of thing
happened hey
who here with none of these artists
lines and the overall shape is of a disc
bulge he's not too far wrong with that I
think it's a very very good attempt now
the debate about other objects that we
saw with our telescopes that look like
spiral clouds spiral nebulae in space
went on for many years with some people
arguing that they were separate from the
Milky Way and they were additional
galaxies additional Island universes as
they were termed at the time during the
debate because the other side argued
that the universe was the whole of the
Milky Way and that though these clouds
of spiral looking gas were nothing more
than whirlpools of gas in space inside
our own Milky Way and indeed there was
he great at it
the great debate in the 1920s and this
went on between Harlow Shapley on one
side and herba Curtis on the other
Shapley argued that the Milky Way was
the entire universe and the spiral
nebulae were just clouds of gas inside
it and Curtis argued that they were
additional Island universes by which he
means what we would now term separate
galaxies out in the universe and they
both argued with various different bits
of evidence but nobody had a
particularly definitive answer there was
one I think should have been a clue and
that was that there were more sudden
brightenings these novi where stars
suddenly get brighter in the andromeda
nebula as it was then called then they
were in the observed in the whole of the
Milky Way and that should have indicated
that it was in fact more on the Herber
curtis island universe side of the
argument
but there were lots of people arguing
different points back and forth now the
resolution of this required an
understanding of a standard candle and
that standard candle is a type of star
called a Cepheid variable these are
named after the first star of the type
to be noted delta cephei i in the
constellation of Cepheus the king and
these are rather unusual massive yellow
giant stars and they pulsate when
brightness and they do it in a very
predictable way once we discovered
enough similar examples we realized that
the pulsations have this sort of graphed
shape at the bottom here where they go
down relatively slowly and then climb
quite quickly to a peak and then repeat
and the repeat period was directly
proportional to the height of the peak
so those that had weak pulses pulsed
very quickly and those that had much
greater swings in power output pulse ate
more slowly in an entirely regular
manner now this is very useful because
it means if you measure the period of
one of these stars you can infer its
power output because we can easily
measure the relative change in
brightness as it pulsates and if there
is a linear factor relation between that
and its power output then we can just
measure the pulsating interval and infer
the actual power and then use using the
idea of a standard candle from that
power output and how bright it appears
to be we can work out the distance of
course we need to know the distance to
some Delta sefie stars in the first
place
and fortunately for us there are some
that were near enough and were within
that 500 light
years also over our ability to measure
in fact there were some that were nearer
than that
a good example is Polaris the Polestar
that's a delta Cepheid and it's a yellow
giant star that pulsates like this and
so this whole idea enabled Edwin Hubble
to settle the great debate really he
measured the period of a variable star
in the Andromeda nebula as it was termed
at a time and his discovery photograph
is on the right it's in the negative
he's marked with in a few things that
are no V that were these exploding stars
but he's at the top crossed out N and
written var because the star got
brighter and then dimmer in a regular
pattern just as it would if it was a
delta Cepheid variable and that meant he
could work out the distance from its
apparent brightness using the standard
candle idea and reason that this was a
million light-years away from us now at
the time we we estimated that perhaps
the Milky Way was something like 50,000
light years and so even if there's a
little bit of error in the estimates a
distance of a million is so much further
away as twenty times as far away from
the Milky Way as the Milky Way was in
size so twenty galaxies sizes away and
that really told us that the universe
was much bigger than anyone had
previously estimated and that these
galaxies were separate Island universes
or galaxies in their own right he's a
marvelous picture of the Andromeda
galaxy round about one trillion stars in
it 220,000 light-years in diameter and
two and a half million light-years away
as measured by the most modern
techniques so Hubble was off by a factor
of two and a half
but there was enough to settle the
arguments
I mean if here's a little map of the
local group of galaxies we've got Milky
Way top-left and Andromeda bottom right
we also got the Triangulum galaxy which
is the third largest member and we're
not sure if the Triangulum galaxy is in
an orbit around Andromeda or minding its
own business we haven't been able to
work that out but both of them are
coming towards the Milky Way the whole
lot are collapsing towards each other at
163 km/s but it's gonna take about 4,500
million years for them to arrive and
collide with the Milky Way and begin
merging we also got lots of small dwarf
galaxies as you can see there some
orbiting the Milky Way some orbiting
Andromeda and one their lot in spate and
so that's a our own local group as we
call it and it's about three million
light years across and pretty much
that's the whole contents of it and then
there's a void out beyond that to the
next group of galaxies which is around
10 million light years away and so
galaxies occur in clusters and then the
clusters cluster into super clusters but
the super clusters are then pretty much
the largest structures in the universe
that's where the the top of the
structure tree maps out and they large
super cluster that we are a member of is
in the direction of the Virgo
constellation and there are about 10,000
galaxies in it and we are hurtling
towards it at two million kilometers an
hour so a tremendous speed but it's 50
million light years away to the center
of the cluster so it's going to take a
very long time to get there
well we look the little Sky Survey by
the Sloan telescope we've actually
mapped the structure of the universe and
the structure of the galaxies and they
are shown in this image we where this
the two missing pieces those are the
bits that hadn't been mapped at the time
so they're not voids but the two slices
of the circle they're the two sectors
north and south that have been mapped
show every individual dot is a galaxy
and then they've used color to indicate
where the density of galaxies has gone
higher and you can see the filamentary
structure of the universe laid out here
the galaxies seemed to form into knots
and the knots are connected by chains
and filaments together and we understand
why that is now we think because our
computer simulations come up with more
or less that sort of structure I think
that all of what we know and what we can
see at the moment in any detail is part
of the Lanica layer super cluster the
little red dot is the little tiny
obscure arm of this super filamentary
structure and then the dots are
individual clusters of galaxies all
hanging around on these immense and
fantastically detailed filaments it's an
amazing view and that's the map there of
the largest piece of the universe that's
ever been created
oh not really did Hubbell figure out
that the separate galaxies were indeed
separate and increase the apparent size
of the known universe by a factor of 20
but he went on to measure the local
galaxies within a radius of our own and
measure the speed with which they were
moving towards or away from us so I said
that the Andromeda galaxy and the
Triangulum galaxy are coming towards us
because gravity's got a good grip on
them and is pulling them in but they
found that all of the other galaxies
were all moving further away from us and
that the further away they already were
the faster they appeared to be moving
regardless of which direction you looked
and he produced this famous plot with
the straight line they're showing that
they speed with which they were moving
is proportional to the distance they are
away now this really only makes sense if
you understand that the universe must be
expanding in all directions and if it's
doing that then it must have been
smaller in the past and so this then fed
in as a strong piece of evidence towards
the beginning of the universe being a
hot dense state from which everything
expanded outwards and we could indeed
run the film backwards if you like to
work out the age of the universe the age
since it was in a hot dense state right
at the beginning and we get a figure now
of about 13.8 billion years so 13,000
million years if you prefer
well this wasn't a surprise to a number
of people in particular George Lemaitre
who was a Catholic priest and physics
professor because he had derived
Hubble's law from Einstein's general
theory of relativity two years earlier
and worked out that this is what you
should observe in the universe that you
would in fact see a uniform expansion
going on so very great achievement by
him and he came up with the idea
therefore that it must have been smaller
in the past and had come from what he
termed the primeval atom this super
dense state of all matter being confined
to a very small region of course now
call that idea of the Big Bang and it's
down to this man Sir Fred Hoyle based in
Cambridge and he didn't like it
in fact he coined the term Big Bang as a
term of derision and it was first
mentioned in this transmission in 1949
on the BBC third program and I don't
know whether you can read it but it says
where it's highlighted these theories
were based on the hypothesis that all
matter in the universe was created in
one Big Bang at a particular time in the
remote past so that was the first use of
the word Big Bang and then goes on to
say it now turns out that in some
respect or other all such theories are
in conflict with the observational
requirements and to a degree that can
hardly be ignored
etc etc and he really was going on to
pooh-pooh the idea of the Big Bang
origin of the universe at all reason
being he had his own theory which was
the steady state up model what he said
was yes the galaxies are moving apart
from each other he couldn't deny that
from the observations but he said that
what happened was that more matter was
then created in the
wayde's between them and then got
together and formed new galaxies and so
if you took a snapshot of what the
universe looked like now and you came
back in a few billion years time and
took another snapshot it would look
almost the same the existing
pre-existing galaxies would have drifted
apart and new ones would have formed in
the gaps
keeping the average density of galaxies
steady and a steady state a steady
average overall density of the universe
and also this implied that the universe
would be infinitely old and that it
would always look now and sorry always
look as it does now in the distant past
now of course we could check that
because we look out into the universe
here's that picture again with the many
many galaxies and the one higher pointy
star there we look into it what is
apparently blank piece of sky and it do
a long enough exposure and this is the
Hubble Ultra Deep Field they pointed the
Hubble Space Telescope at a previously
thought to be blank period piece of the
sky on the sky map and exposed a
one-month long exposure and produced
this photograph and it shows galaxy
after galaxy and some of them look like
they're twelve billion years old and
that the light has been traveling that
length of time across the universe to
get to us now if this
Euler area of the sky is typical of the
rest of the sky which we haven't checked
because telescope time is very expensive
and a month is a very large bill for use
of the telescope but we would estimate
that if this density were roughly the
same in every direction that they would
be 100 billion galaxies scattered across
the sky out to that's that distance that
we've been able to observe but when we
look at this photograph we notice
straight away that the distant galaxies
look different to the more nearby easily
recognizable ones there are actually
different shapes they're a little bit
more irregular and less well-defined and
of course they're also very red in color
you see a red object here is a very
distant galaxy that's because the light
coming from those galaxies is traveling
through space that is expanding and as
it does so it gets its wavelength
stretched and it's the further away it
has therefore come from the more
stretching that light has had and so the
more it is shifted into the red end of
the spectrum the longer wavelength end
we call that the redshift
and of course when we're looking at
these very distant galaxies we're not
only looking a long way in space we're
looking back in time and seeing them as
they were not as they might be today
because of that speed of light and the
distance and how long it's taken the
light to get to us it's quite sad or
inspiring to think that we are imaging
objects that are where the light has
been traveling 12 billion years to get
to us and that they're that far into the
past
as an aside I've got the notes on how we
know that the speed of light is not
infinite
and the first person navigate this was
Galileo he used a lamp and he got his
assistant onto a distant Hill top with
another lamp and tried to do an
experiment whereby he would expose his
lamp and when the assistant saw the
light he would uncover his Galileo would
then see his assistants light and cover
his own back up and so it would
ping-pong backwards and forwards between
them and it's lighting and unlighted and
he'd be able to use the round-trip delay
to work out the speed of light
now of course it doesn't work very well
because with the assistant only about a
mile away the round-trip time is so
short that human reaction times ruin the
experiment but he did at least conclude
that it was at least 10 times faster
than the speed of sound and Olay Roma
then came along and had a go at this did
the same experiment using the moons of
Jupiter as his assistant and the fact
that they disappear behind Jupiter was
the equivalent of Galileo's assistant
covering them up and then revealing them
when they came out of eclipse and by
doing that and using the geometry shown
on the right here looking at the events
and timing when they occurred with the
earth at different positions around the
Earth's orbit at points G and F for
example he could work out that the
Eclipse appeared to happen later than
predicted at Point F then a point that
would at Point G by the travel time of
light from G to F and so he got quite a
good figure as shown at the bottom there
because we make made much more precise
measurements of the speed of light since
with devices called interferometers this
is Michelson and Morley z'
interferometer it measures the speed of
light very very accurately in fact what
they were trying to do was determine if
the speed of light was moving some
optimum through a thing called the ether
and see if there was an ether wind that
the speed of which could be measured
blowing across the earth as the earth
moved around the Sun and it would change
its relative direction towards any ether
wind and they found absolutely nothing
the speed of light was completely
constant and but of course this was
explained by Einstein in 1905 with his
theory of special relativity
which tells us that the only fixed thing
about observations is that the speed of
light is the same no matter what
observation you make or how the observer
is moving and so going back to the
hubble deep structure and Hoyle and his
steady state theory turns out that what
we're observing way back in the past
using the speed of light to determine
how far away and where for how old these
objects are does not look the same as
the modern universe the big thing to
note really is that the ancient universe
contains many quasars which are the
early forming galaxies where there's a
black hole a supermassive black hole
forming in the middle of the young
chaotic galaxy and feeding voraciously
on infalling material and that creates a
very empower 'fl Jets of waste material
shot out from above the poles on the
magnetic axis and creates these very
bright objects called quasars and we
don't see them anywhere nearby in the
modern universe and so I'm afraid pred
wrong the universe does not look now as
it always has done it has changed and
changed quite considerably well so we
now have the modern theory of the Big
Bang and it's summed up in the diagram
on the right here with the Big Bang
happening we don't know what triggered
the Big Bang but it happened and threw
huge amounts of energy into the universe
there was a very rapid period of
expansion and then things settle down a
bit and eventually the stars and
galaxies started to form about 400
million years after the Big Bang had
occurred when things have begun to calm
down a bit but we
he's shown here pattern here is the UH
faux light of the Big Bang and dates
from just 380,000 years after the Big
Bang and that was discovered by these
two gentlemen Penzias and Wilson in 1964
they were actually telecoms engineers
and they were trying to produce
long-range communications and were
having trouble with a persistent noise
that seemed to fill the sky no matter
what direction they were looking
everything they did we're trying to
debug their equipment they even had
their student engineers climb inside the
giant horn antenna and evict the pigeons
and clean out all the pigeon muck in
case that was the source of this
background noise that they just couldn't
get rid of but eventually they were put
in touch with some theorists who had
predicted that they would be this
leftover heat signature filling the sky
if the Big Bang Theory was true and so
they were shared the Nobel Prize for the
discovery of what we now call the cosmic
microwave background radiation
this pattern of heat that is the
afterglow from the early time in the
universe when it when it was very hot
and dense when it was emitted it would
have been three or four thousand degrees
Kelvin that the temperature of a red
star and the whole universe would have
looked a little bit like a red giant
star I suppose buts the time since and
the expansion of the universe since has
cooled that radiation by a factor of
around at one or two thousand from its
original wavelength stretching it out
and making it so that the wavelengths
are no longer in the red part of the
visible spectrum but are down in the
microwaves region and with a equivalent
temperature of just two point seven
degrees Kelvin
so we have this big bang and we have the
universe expanding so we can start to
ask some new questions why where is it
going in the future we know that gravity
is pulling everything towards everything
else and so perhaps there is enough
gravity to gather the material back
together
reverse the expansion and leads to a
future Big Crunch and Joan its
trajectory for the universe starting at
zero size here coming up - ow and then
expanding rate bill falling back some
distant point in the future - the Big
Crunch but on the other hand if there's
not enough gravity then maybe the
universe has got essentially escape
velocity already and got enough energy
of expansion to overcome that gravity
and to run away and escape forever and
it could so on one of these other
trajectories like it's rather nice to
know now another piece that we have only
briefly touched on in this was the
discovery of dark matter and this is
Fritz Vikki who were estimated that the
mass of all of the galaxies in the
photograph here the Coma Cluster was not
enough if we added up all of the
equivalent brightness of the stars we
could estimate how many stars there were
and again in the same sort of way say
well on average the mass of a star is
whatever it is and so estimate the total
mass of the galaxies and therefore their
affective cluster gravity and then
looking at the red shifts and the
Doppler shift of their movement we could
work out their speeds and he worked out
that their speeds were about ten times
too fast to keep the cluster bound
together it should fly apart but clearly
it hadn't and so something must be
pulling that
material together much more strongly
than we could account for and he came up
with the idea that it was perhaps dark
matter that was responsible for that and
maybe that will influence the overall
outcome of the universe going forward so
there's a quite a number of aspects of
our sort of modern theory of the Big
Bang the composition of the universe the
expansion of the universe the amount of
matter that's in it and so on but it
still leaves quite a number of questions
and so what I'm now going to do is go
through the questions that I'm always
asked after I've talked about the Big
Bang and I'm entitled a next slide
tricky questions and so the first one is
what came before the Big Bang the next
one that people ask me is where was the
center of the Big Bang and perhaps the
most popular of all if the universe is
expanding what is it expanding into and
another one related to relativity is is
the expansion moving things away from us
faster than the speed of light and these
are all excellent questions that show
that people have really been listening
and and understanding what's been said
because these questions are all hiding
there waiting to be attempted so let's
have a go with like all tricky answers
so what came before the Big Bang
well my tricky answers are this one that
time itself was created at the Big Bang
along with space and energy and so
without time there could be no before
there is no sense in which there was an
earlier time and in the same way you can
imagine traveling a lot on the earth and
trying to go north and eventually you
come to the North Pole
and you can't go any more north than the
North Pole because that's where the
coordinate system has its origin it
comes from there and so is the case with
time it emerged from the Big Bang and
expanded outwards along with space in
every direction but there was no going
before time zero it's like trying to go
further north than the North Pole where
was the center of the Big Bang and this
is because everybody is told by the
media that this picture that I've shared
here represents the Big Bang of an
explosion outwards from a center it's a
concept we're very familiar with in the
everyday world of things exploding like
that but the answer is the Big Bang was
not an explosion of matter and energy
outwards across space it was actually an
exponentially rapid expansion of space
itself and so it is not that things were
thrown out words across space from an
origin but that all the places in space
were initially together and then somehow
suddenly they expanded outwards and
every gap between every object between
every point had more space created in
the gap and so actually the answer is
that everywhere was the center and
everywhere is equal and there was no
center to the Big Bang
Copernicus would like this you know we
are not the center of the universe at
least we have no greater claim to be
that the one fixed reference point than
anybody else it turns out oh that is
wrong and you have to work quite hard to
get that out of your mind when thinking
about this
in an expanding universe we can think of
it as as shown in this diagram on the
right all the galaxies are receding from
you and nobody is special and you are
not the center and nor is anybody else
let's pick this let's say that us and if
you look around us here you do that we
have a group of galaxies all roughly one
group a after a certain length of time
the grew bigger because the universe
expanded but nobody's changed addition
on the grid it's just the grid bigger so
they've not moved through space but
space has grown and the relative ditions
have preserved what's interesting is
that if we tried to do galaxy instead we
can say exactly the same thing all of
the neighboring axes have moved a from
us I same amount but if you look from
the like the the black one here that's
they that's one unit over to the green
one it's to a certain time the distance
to be black actually here own let's say
that on 1/2 units now and the distance
to the Bing is up to three dough that is
Hubble's law that the one that was
further away from two three so it's
recession velocity in one unit of time
is 1/2 minutes a 3-2 whereas the bright
galaxies darting error has gone from one
to one and a half so it's velocity away
from us is s in direct proportion so
that's really the explanation of the
whole idea of the universe okay nobody
being the
Center isn't a centre of course what we
doing is representing the whole of the
universe as I mention all surfeit of
these three-dimensional balloons that
we're saying anything about the contents
or the volume of those balloons we're
pretending that the three dimensions are
all encompassed who are the moon we have
to do that because our brains are not
very good at thinking in 4d and it's
certainly not very easy to show it on a
PowerPoint presentation
Aniki question was if the universe is
expanding what is it expanding into so
to answer this one I repeat that the Big
Bang was not an explosion the space
itself is the thing that's doing the
expanding it's not expanding into
anything the space gets bigger but it
doesn't it's not a question of moving
from the space you were in into some new
region okay and I think you can see that
if you think about that balloon diagram
again then we have this question
it's the expansion moving things away
from us faster than the speed of light
and the answer to that one surprisingly
yes but it's the expansion of the
universe is because it's not movement of
galaxies through space it's the
expansion of space that's okay because
it's only movement through space that is
limited by relativity to not be faster
than the speed of light in a vacuum okay
movement through space must be slower or
equal to the speed of light but space
itself can expand at any speed including
speeds faster than light so that's not a
problem at all
now here we're going to try and get to
the answer of the question that I came
up with is the universe infinite
and because the speed of light is finite
we know that we've measured it very
precisely and we know that the universe
is finite ly old the Big Bang happened
13.8 billion years ago there is a
distance beyond which you cannot see
your cosmic horizon
this is places in the universe where the
light has not had time yet to reach you
given its distance and the distance of
the amount of space that it has to cross
to get to you
so this cosmic horizon grows with time
every nanosecond the cosmic horizon gets
one foot larger because light travels
one foot in one nanosecond 30
centimeters in a nanosecond is a a light
foot it's how far light will travel in
one billionth of a second that's quite a
useful figure to remember sometimes and
so as the universe gets older and older
the light has had more and more time to
do the travelling and so that horizon
around us appears to enlarge or it would
do if it were not for the expansion
factor of the universe because the as
the universe is expanding it is making
the apparent distance that the light has
to cross be larger and I say a parent
distance and I've been very careful with
my words because although the universe
is only thirteen point seven or 13.8
billion years old the distance to that
cosmic horizon now works out to be 45
billion light years you'd think it would
be thirteen point seven or thirteen
point eight wouldn't you but it's more
than that and that is because the light
beams set off from whatever object we're
observing went through some of the space
and then after it had gone through the
space expanded behind it so it didn't
cost the light beam as much time to
cross that space as the size of the
space became afterwards and so if you
work all of that out and you do the
rather complicated calculation you can
work out that the oldest bits of space
that it traversed first have stretched
by an enormous factor but the more
recent bits that it's only recently
traversed
hardly expanded at all while it was
doing it and it comes out to this
expansion of the time from 45 years but
whatever that number it's very
interesting because there could be
objects beyond our horizon in fact I
think there must be objects beyond our
horizon and I'm going to try and
persuade you why and the reason is that
everybody has a different view of the
cosmic horizon it is us here on earth
and as a theoretical planet here point a
right on the edge of our cosmic horizon
today just about come into view recently
the one at point B over here we can see
a DP because just inside our horizon
over on the planet that B horizon just 3
is the earth is like this he can't da
likewise a DB don't for an observer at B
hey outside his cosmic horizon and
unless you're going to try and argue
that earth is special and right at the
center of the universe at which point
Copernicus will spin in his grave then
you must accept that our view is
probably not special and that therefore
there will be objects beyond our cosmic
light horizon and so for many observers
across the universe effectively they
would all have these cosmic bubbles that
they live in that they can see and that
those those are expanding in apparent
size but the problem is that the father
reaches of those are beginning to race
away due to cosmic expansion faster
there
the speed of light and so there's a race
between being able to see things at some
distant point in the future when the
light beam finally arrives versus them
having been carried away and ending up
beyond our cosmic horizon forever well
that's all well and good can we prove it
well there is some evidence of a thing
called dark flow and this is a very
intriguing possibility that observed
from the earth when we map the apparent
movement of all of the galaxies that we
see in the universe around us it appears
that things are a bit lopsided and in
particular some objects yeah on the side
of the universe within our cosmic model
are moving all throughout towards some
point beyond they cosmic horizon that we
can't see as if they're being pulled by
gravity and so it's suggestive of the
fact that there is a very large
concentration of mass yeah but beyond
the horizon like these are being pulled
towards due to the influence of gravity
that they are able to detect it within
their cosmic horizon but not within
hours and some evidence for this and
it's called dark flow they're not
entirely sure if this is right it's a
little bit speculative
so we set out to answer the question
what is the size of the universe and we
haven't really answered it but I'm going
to argue that we've learned that it's a
finite age and the modern figure is
thirteen point seven four billion years
to give it to four significant figures
but that it's larger than we can see
goes out beyond our cosmic horizon and
there are logical reasons for thinking
that that is the case as well as the
possible dark flow evidence but I'm
going to suggest that it's probably
infinitely large and my reason for that
goes back to the idea of this in that
you can extend this diagram with as many
people as many hypothetical planets to
the left and to the right and nobody if
nobody is allowed to claim that they are
at the center then there is only one
answer for the sized because the only
number that you can divide by two and
still end up with you having the same
number is infinity
it's as if there are an infinite number
of these overlapping cosmic spheres of
time around everybody and that nobody's
got a right to claim that theirs is the
center and if nobody's at the center
then there can be no edge logically and
so
I think the universe is infinitely large
but sadly most of that indeed an
infinite amount of it leaving an
infinitesimal amount of it's inside our
cosmic sphere of observability will
never be able to see
I was going to say we've got the Gaia
satellite up there mapping the galaxy to
even greater accuracy at the moment and
producing great results it's vastly
improving on any map that we've had
before but it's still only looking at 1%
of the stars in our galaxy and the other
thing that we haven't mentioned is the
whole idea of dark energy and the
observations that based on using white
dwarf stars as standard candles actually
the universe is somehow speeding up
caused by some sort of anti-gravity
property and we call that dark energy
and I have that of another talk that I'm
going to do called cosmic dawn and
destiny where I'll deal with the whole
idea of the details of what happened at
the Big Bang itself as far as we know
and what we think about this dark energy
and what's going to happen to the
universe in the very very long term and
the evidence for and against dark energy